Gimp Open source image-editing
software you can get your teeth into
Gimp 让你着迷的开源图形编辑软件
Gimp: Creative
Gimp: 创造力
Gimp can do more with text than you might think, as our graphics guru
Michael J Hammel demonstrates with his two beautiful assistants.

Gimp在文字处理上能做的事情比你想象的还要多，就像我们的图形大师Michael J Hammel 和他的两位漂亮的助理所展示的那样。

Gimp is first and foremost a tool for working with raster
images. Most desktop users will prefer to work with Gimp
when dealing with their digital photographs but might
choose other tools like Inkscape or Scribus when working with
text. But don’t be fooled: Gimp does a great job with text effects,
and in ways that most people might think can only be done with
vector applications.

Gimp是第一个同时也是最重要的一个处理光栅图像的工具。大多数的桌面用户都更喜欢用Gimp处理他们的数字照片，但是他们可能会用其他诸如 Inkscape(开源的矢量图形编辑软件) 或者 Scribus(桌面排版软件) 等工具来处理文字。但是不用那么麻烦：Gimp就能做出很棒的文字效果，而且这种效果会让大多数人以为只有矢量图形应用才能完成。


This month I’m going to walk you through a little trick with text
that my wife found in a design magazine. In that tutorial the
process was handled using InDesign. InDesign, for those who don’t
use it, is a vector layout tool. It does clever things with text using
boxes to align and block objects within the layout. This particular
effect, which you can see in the cover image for this tutorial, turns
out to be even easier in Gimp than described in the original
InDesign tutorial.

这个月我准备带你们看一个文字处理的小技巧，那是我妻子在一本设计杂志上发现的。在那个教程里使用的是InDesign(专业排版领域的设计软件)来进行设计处理。InDesign，对那些不熟悉它的人来说，是一个排版工具。它能利用框对齐

Projects like this have important periphery components
beyond just the text. This design requires a source image that has
sufficient colour and contrast. Without colour and contrast the
shapes within the image won’t be recognisable through the text.
The project also requires a suitable font. The font needs to be
thick and should not use any serifs. Serif fonts will make the final
image appear cluttered, and in most cases won’t allow as much
detail from the source image to show through, even when bold
versions of the serif font are used. It can also make it difficult to
recognise the text from the image.
The goal of this project is to map an image on to text but keep
the original image recognisable. Gimp’s text features make the
actual design something that can be done in a few minutes and
with a limited set of steps. So before we dive into that, let’s take a
look at some of these periphery issues involved when working on
similar designs.
Select a stock image
To start the project, visit one of the many low-cost stock image
sites and search for a human portrait. The picture we want needs
to include two important features. The first is a solid coloured
background. A cluttered background will make it harder to identify
the subject of the image when we apply our text effect.
The second important feature is a fair amount of colour
contrast. An all-black image would work just fine, but would end
up being nothing more than shadow-filled text. For this project I
selected a woman in a black dress with enough skin tones to
provide some colour contrast. We’ll add to that contrast with a soft
vignette a little later.
When selecting stock images you should be aware of licensing
issues. If the image is of inanimate objects, you’re generally safe. If
the image shows a recognisable face, then you’ll need to make
sure the publisher of the photo (whoever uploaded it) has
obtained a model release from the subject of the image. Without
the model release, you can’t use the image in published work.
Last month In last month’s column, author Michael J. Hammel talked about using
90 Linux Format October 2008
LXF110.tut_gimp 90
31/7/08 1:35:4 pm
Gimp Tutorial
design
All three text
samples are set
to 18 pixels with
-5 pixel line
spacing and -2
pixel tracking.
The seated woman has a low contrast between background,
skin and dress; the dancing woman is a much better image.
Fortunately, most stock image sites will either require the
photographer to submit the model release or let you know if no
model release is available.
Working with comps
So you’ve scanned a few hundred images and found a few that
might work. How can you tell how well they’ll work? The answer
comes from working with comps. A comp is a small version of a
stock image that typically contains a watermark. Most of the stock
image sites will allow you to download a comp or, if they don’t
explicitly offer them, will have large enough sample versions for
viewing that you can download without paying for them.
Comps are for experimenting. They’re often too small to use in
final projects and would be inappropriate considering the
watermark. But they’re useful for testing an idea. The testing for
this project requires only that we use a smaller font size that what
we’ll use in the final project. I used comps of several images before
selecting the final image of the woman in the black dress. If the
comps are too small you can double the image size for the
experiment even if that pixellates the image.
This effect works best with thick, straight-edged fonts. Script
fonts don’t show the image very well, even when a bold face is
used. In this tutorial I’m using the bold version of the Tahoma font
but any sans font, probably using the bold face, will suffice.
The first Gimp-specific tip for this tutorial is related to the Text
tool options. Select the Text tool and then open the Tool Options
dialog (Dialogs > Tool Options). Just above the button labelled ‘Text
Along Path’ there are three options. These options are for, top to
bottom, Indent, Line Spacing and Tracking. We won’t be using the
indent option but we do want to use the other two. We want the
value in Line Spacing made smaller (to negative values) so that the
lines of text will be as close as possible without overlapping.
Tracking sets the space between letters. This is similar to
kerning but is not exactly identical. Again, the technical
explanation is not important here. We just want to reduce this
setting (also to negative numbers) to reduce the space between
letters – the closer the better.
Quick
tip
Scan multiple
stock photo archives,
such as
BigStockPhoto.com,
iStockPhoto.com
and Stock.xchng
(www.sxc.hu).
Adding a vignette
The first thing we want is to add a soft vignette. This will make the
final image a little more colourful while keeping the woman’s
shape recognisable. To do this, we add a transparent layer above
the main layer (Layer > New) and name this new layer Vignette.
Select the Elliptical selection tool from the Toolbox and in the
image window draw an oval selection around the girl. Feather the
selection (Select > Feather) by 100 pixels. Choose a warm colour
for the foreground colour by clicking on the foreground colour box
in the Toolbox. I’m using RGB values of 231/127/35 for this tutorial.
We now need to add a radial gradient inside the circle.
Choose the Gradient tool from the Toolbox. In the Tool Options
dialog (Dialogs > Tool Options) set the Gradient to ‘FG To
Transparent’ and the Shape to ‘Radial’ In the image, click and drag
.
from the middle of the selection to just past the top of the
selection. Set the vignette layer’s mode to Multiply.
At this point I add a little noise to the gradient for an artistic
effect, but this step is optional. To add the noise, select Filters >
Noise > HSV Noise and set the Holdness to 2, the Saturations to
255 and the Value to 255. The default setting for Hue (which
If you missed last issue Call 0870 837 4773 or +44 1858 438795.
October 2008 Linux Format 91
LXF110.tut_gimp 91
31/7/08 1:35:13 pm
Tutorial Gimp
Choose a warn colour for the vignette, to add some extra contrast to the final
image – this really helps in the white areas of the source photograph.
Quick
tip
Vignettes are an
easy way to add
colour to high-
contrast, low-
colour photos.
should be 3) should not be changed. Then apply this to the
Vignette by clicking on the OK button. The noise will only be applied
within the selection and only to coloured pixels – not transparent
ones. You can clear the selection now (Select > None) and merge
the Vignette and background layers (Image > Flatten Image).
Adding a text layer
The crux of this tutorial is to use text as a mask over the image. To
do this, start by resetting the default colours in the Toolbox (the
small black and white boxes below and to the left of the larger
black and white boxes). Then create a text layer filled with random
words. Choose the Text tool from the Toolbox and click in the
image. This will open up the Text Editor window. In this window,
paste a large amount of text.
So what text should you use? I first copied 1,500 words from
the Lorum Ipsum generator into a 100-character-wide text
terminal. I then used the Vi editor to remove all line breaks (Shift+J
on each line, making one long line) and mapped the text to fit the
window with line breaks (In Vi: G+Q+J). If this isn’t long enough,
join all the lines again, copy and past below it to extend the text.
The select and copy this text into the Text Editor window. Using a
100-character-wide terminal allowed me to create text that would
Any noise you add to the vignette might not be visible in the
finished image (this depends on the font thickness).
be wide enough to cover the image but still include line breaks
which Gimp needs to block the text.
Pasting the text will update the image window immediately. You
can now close the Text Editor window. In the Tool Options dialog
you’re ready to set the font, size, line spacing and tracking as
mentioned previously. Choose the font and size before changing
the spacing and tracking. Remember I used Tahoma Bold, which
you can find in the Corefonts project on SourceForge. You’ll also
want the text in black so you can see it in the image window.
Set the line spacing to -5 and the tracking to -3. This is
sufficient to push the letters up against each other horizontally
and vertically without overlapping, at least for this specific font
and size.
Getting the source images
The source images from this tutorial
were purchased from BigStockPhoto
for $2 each. The image IDs are
Pretty Dancing Woman (black
dress): 1716725 (size: 1066 x 1600)
Sunflower Girl: 2861058
(size: 900 x 900)
Pixel amounts specified in the
tutorial are based on these source
image sizes.
Cows do not require a model release.
Initially the text will not be aligned with the rest of the image,
but we’ll fix that with the Align Tool.
Never miss another issue Subscribe to the #1 source for Linux on p102.
92 Linux Format October 2008
LXF110.tut_gimp 92
31/7/08 1:35:15 pm
Gimp Tutorial
The text layer is much larger than the canvas window (which Keeping multiple versions of the text layer and masks lets you compare the masks
has been zoomed out to show the text layer boundaries). and return to the version that looks best without having to recreate it later.
Now align the text layer with the Align tool (it looks like a box other set is for distribution, which we aren’t concerned with here).
with arrows pointing away from all four sides). Click on the image Click on the horizontal and vertical alignment buttons, which each
window over the visible text. This adds the text layer to the set of look like two arrows pointing to a central line, which is either
layers to be aligned. Hold the Shift key down and click on the horizontal or vertical. Now the text is aligned over the image.
background layer (the woman in the dress) in the image window Resize the canvas to fit the text layer, zoom out and shrink-wrap
to add it to the layers to be aligned. Now the text layer and the the window (Ctrl+E) around the canvas.
background layer are included in the set of layers to be aligned. 
You can tell this is the case by looking for small black boxes at the 
corners of each layer that will be included in the alignment. 
In Layers dialog make sure the background layer is the active 
layer, and in the Tool Options dialog, set the ‘Relative To:’ menu to 
    Active Layer. In the Tool Options dialog there are two sets of six 
    buttons that look identical. The first set are for alignment (the 
This is the final image, except that you may want to adjust
the position of the mask over the background image.
Create a mask layer
Quick
tip
Generate lots of
random text using
the free Lorum
Ipsum generator:
www.lipsum.com
Now we’re ready to create our mask. We start this process by
adding a White layer to the image (Layer > New, set Fill Type to
White). Drag this layer into the Layers dialog below the
background layer. At this point you should drag the text layer
below the background layer too.
Click on the Text layer in the Layers dialog to make it the active
layer, then create a selection of the text (Layer > Text to Selection
> Text to Selection) and invert the selection (Select > Invert). This
provides a selection of everything except the text. Click on the
White layer you just added to make it active. Create a copy from
the selection (Edit > Copy) and then paste the copy (Edit > Paste).
This creates a Floating Selection layer in the Layers dialog that
must be converted to a new layer manually (Layer > New).
What you’ve done here is to paste a white layer with the text
stamped out of it over the source image. Where the text was
stamped out, the source image shows. Turn off the visibility of the
Text layer by clicking on the Eye icon to the left of the layer
thumbnail in the Layers dialog.
Click on the background layer in the Layers dialog to make it
the active layer. Choose the Move tool from the Toolbox. Hold
down the Shift key and click and drag in the image window to
move the woman and vignette around under the mask. Moving the
source image around under the mask may not be enough to get a
good result – you may need to adjust the text layer font size,
tracking or line spacing. You may even need to try a different font.
If any of this becomes necessary, turn off the visibility of the mask
layer first and then duplicate the Text layer. Duplication is
necessary so you keep a copy of the last settings. Adjust the font
settings in the text layer duplicate. Then repeat the selection,
invert, copy and paste process to create a new mask. LXF
Next month Gimp has tons of selection tools – we’ll look at the most useful.
October 2008 Linux Format 93
LXF110.tut_gimp 93
31/7/08 1:35:21 pm

