Tutorial Gimp Open source image-editing
Gimp
software you can get your teeth into
Gimp: Create a
f
Michael J Hammel continues his journey on the fickle wings of inspiration 
this month. He invites you to fire up Gimp and join him on his travels.
Take stock
 Our basis
Woman with hair blowing upward: 
bigstockphoto.com/photo/view/1921777
 Ornate frames
Golden picture frame: istockphoto.com/stock-photo-
1710947-golden-picture-frame.php
  Vintage gold frame: istockphoto.com/stock-photo-
4930364-vintage-gold-frame.php
 Flames
We used the fire pictures at: 
sxc.hu/browse.phtml?f=view&id=1093986 
sxc.hu/browse.phtml?f=view&id=1099709
sxc.hu/browse.phtml?f=view&id=1104673 
sxc.hu/browse.phtml?f=view&id=1143736

After nearly 30 years of developing and using software,
I sometimes find it hard to find motivation for my
next project. The same holds true for my artwork, so
when I come across something that reinvigorates my
enthusiasm I tend to hold on to it like a CEO on to bailout
funding. Enthusiasm is currency – and it must be spent
quickly or the value declines.
So I must ask your forgiveness, dear reader, as I indulge
my enthusiasm with another expert-level project based
around inspiration. As with last month, this tutorial is more
about trying to inspire budding Gimp users to dig around and
combine ideas than revealing how to perform a specific
process, although I’ll cover the process as well.
is also reproducible in Gimp, but the lack of a warpable
Transform tool makes the process more difficult – though not
impossible – to complete.
The concepts behind the two tutorials are complementary
and encourage experimentation. If you want to follow this
amalgam project exactly, it requires a number of stock
images that are either available for free or a low cost from
stock image repositories (see Take Stock, above). It doesn’t
require the Gimp Paint Shop package I’ve described over the
past few months, but having it will offer you more options.
I’ve created the project at 2350x2033, but if you need to
to reduce memory and CPU requirements, scale the stock
images down by 50% before starting.
Revitalise your burnt out creativity
This project, which I call Fire Goddess, is based on two online
tutorials that I’ve merged together. The first of my
inspirations, Mystic (http://psdtuts.com/designing-
tutorials/the-making-of-mystic), produces in Photoshop
what I can only describe as a Mayan god. This project is
completely reproducible under Gimp, but I was unable to find
suitable ornamental pieces to use here.
My second inspiration comes from a Photoshop tutorial
that shows you how to create an image of a woman on fire
http://psd.tutsplus.com/tutorials/tutorials-effects/
how-to-create-a-flaming-photo-manipulation. This project
This flaming hot beauty is the result of all your hard work.
Last month We destroyed a city with Gimp and a graphics tablet.
82     LXF121 August 2009
LXF121.tut_gimp 82
www.linuxformat.com
8/6/09 11:27:36 am
Gimp Tutorial
fire goddess
Step by step: Set the world alight!
1
A simple process
Let’s start by looking at the original image and the 
final image. As you can see, plenty has changed, 
but there are two notable alterations: firstly, I’ve 
removed the hair of the girl and, secondly, the 
image is flame coloured.
The reason our goddess is hairless is that I’d 
originally intended this project to closely follow 
the tutorial for creating a flaming girl. With that in 
mind, I chose a base image with hair that should 
be easy to convert to flames using Gimp. However, 
because that process used a feature of Photoshop 
that isn’t easily duplicated in Gimp (specifically, the 
warpable Transform tool), I changed this project, 
making the hair in the source image irrelevant.
Throughout the project you’ll also notice that 
flames are not just components of the image, but 
also used for colouring. The easy way of using a 
flame to colour a layer is to desaturate the layer to 
be coloured, add a flame layer above it and set the 
flame’s Layer Mode appropriately. However, if you 
place anything below that layer, the black region 
around the flame may block it from being visible. 
2
Isolate the girl
The first step in this project is to isolate the girl 
from her background. We’ll do this primarily 
because the background in the source image for 
the girl isn’t required and its colour may cause 
problems when mixed with other layers. Removing 
it will also enable me to add background elements 
behind the girl’s head.
To isolate the girl, first Desaturate (Colours > 
Desaturate) the source image with the Luminosity 
setting selected. The reason for using this setting 
is that the source image has a yellowish tint when 
converted from its original colour space (provided 
in the image when downloaded from the stock 
image website) to the colour-managed display in 
Gimp. I say colour-managed, because I configured 
the monitor profile for my Acer X203W monitors 
3
Cutting her hair
In the original layer (which is titled Background by 
default), I use Ctrl+A to select the entire layer and 
then drag the black foreground colour into the 
canvas to fill that layer with black. 
Now it’s time to get rid of the girl’s hair. Just like 
most operations that involve components of an 
image, I don’t really want to remove these from the 
layer itself, but rather leave them in place and mask 
them with a layer mask. The reason for leaving 
these elements in place is so that I can decide 
later to reincorporate the component (in this case 
hair) into the project. This kind of flexibility is a real 
To avoid this, we’ll use layer masks on flame layers 
or simply copy and paste flames (without the black 
backgrounds) from their source image.
The final process for creating the Fire Goddess 
can be reduced to these basic steps:
1  Isolate the girl from the background.
2    etect the edges of her head and create multiple 
D
corresponding layers to get a perfect selection.
3  Blend in ornamental elements.
4  Do some fine blending to remove excess details.
5  Colour the image with flames.
6  Create the flaming hat.
7  Add the background emblem.
Note that even if you follow this tutorial exactly, 
you won’t produce the same image as me. The 
steps I’ll present allow for too many variations, 
especially when creating the flaming hat. Don’t be 
discouraged if your first attempt is less than ideal, 
though. I went through seven different designs 
before settling on this process and the first four 
or five of those are – to be kind to myself – not 
something I’d ever show in public. 
in Gimp’s Preferences. Thankfully, the yellow tint 
converts to a bright white when the Luminosity 
option is selected in the Desaturate window.
Now I can use Select By Colour from the Gimp 
toolbox and click on the white background. With 
the Tool Options Threshold set to 50, this will 
select all of the background, a little of the hair and 
some of the face and neck. To avoid selecting any 
skin, switch to Quick Mask mode and paint out the 
white areas on the girl with a large black brush. 
Now switch off Quick Mask mode and Invert the 
selection. This selection is then copied and pasted 
to a new layer, which I name Girl. I then fit the new 
layer to the canvas using Layer > Layer To Image 
Size so that any modifications I make won’t be 
restricted by the size of the layer.
assets of editing images digitally, so I encourage 
you to make use of it. 
In this case, I add a white layer mask to the 
image. Starting with a large brush and switching 
to smaller brushes as I proceed, I paint with black 
on top of the girl’s hair in the layer mask until most 
of the hair is removed. I leave a small amount of 
hair because I will be using edge-detect filters later 
and I know the lines in the hair will provide another 
visual feature using those filters. Afterwards, 
I switch off the Girl layer’s visibility so it won’t 
interfere with the next steps.
If you missed last issue Call 0870 837 4773 or +44 1858 438795.
www.tuxradar.com
LXF121.tut_gimp 83
August 2009 LXF121     83
8/6/09 11:27:38 am
Tutorial Gimp
4
Edge detection
The next step in this project is to
create detailed outlines of the girl
using two edge-detection filters:
Edge (Filters > Edge Detect > Edge)
and Neon (found by going to Filters
> Edge Detect > Neon). These
produce similar results that I’ll
combine later with Layer Modes.
To begin with, I duplicate the
Girl layer and name the duplicate
layer Edge Detect. After that, I
then open up the Edge Detect filter
and select the Prewitt Compass
algorithm. I choose an algorithm  
6
5
based on the preview and here I
selected the one that showed the
most detail. Apply this filter to the
layer and then set the Layer Mode
to Screen.
The Girl layer is duplicated
again, this time naming the new
layer Neon Detect. This layer
is moved to the top of the layer
stack and the colours are inverted
in this (Colours > Invert) before
applying the Neon edge detection
filter. The Layer Mode is set to
Screen and, finally, this layer is
duplicated once, resulting in three
layers dedicated to edge detection
stacked above the Girl layer.
Zoom in now and you may find
some strands of hair that weren’t
masked in the last step. These can
be left, or you can remove them
with the Eraser. If you do this, the
Eraser will probably need to be
applied to the same area on each
of the three edge detection layers.
These would be too difficult to see
in print, so I’m not showing them
here. In my project, however, I
erased the extra strands of hair –
I’m obnoxiously detail-oriented.
Continue decorating the goddess
The ornament around the neck is
created in exactly the same way,
albeit with a new copy of the frame.
A new copy is required because the
angle of rotation, size and position
will be different to the Forehead
version, not to mention being
masked differently. In this layer, the
bottom edge of the frame is kept
while the rest is masked out.
Similarly, the collar is decorated
with the oval frame. This time the
frame is flipped vertically before
rotation, sizing and positioning.
Finally, a mask is added to keep just
the lower section of the frame.
Note that the frame images
were significantly smaller than the
main image window and the girl.
This required increasing the size
of the frames. Scaling an image
up is problematic because the
scaled image quickly becomes
pixellated. However, in this case
the pixellation is hardly noticeable
because of the weakly identifiable
shapes (the ornate structure has
no discernible pattern). Using
blending layer modes also hides
some of the pixellation and our
colouring technique hides it even
more. Large prints, however,
would likely show the pixellation.
Therefore, if you intend to make
any prints of this image, they
should to be no larger than the
size of a magazine page. (Pretty
convenient, eh?)
Blend in the ornamental elements
Now it’s time to get our goddess
looking ornamental. The best place
to find suitable designs to use for
this are picture frames and building
architecture. This project has stuck
with picture frames only because I
couldn’t find any really good
photos of Victorian architecture.  
There are three ornamental
pieces I’m adding to this design:
one on the forehead, one at the
junction of head and neck, and one
to form a collar. The first two come
from a rectangular frame while the
latter comes from an oval frame.
I start with a rectangular frame
and Desaturate it. Because the
frame is fully enclosed in the solid-
coloured background and also
encloses a solid-coloured area,
selecting the frame is easiest
using the Fuzzy Select tool set
with a Threshold of 50. Clicking
once outside the frame and again
inside it creates a selection of
the background. Grow this by
one pixel (something I nearly
always do to avoid leaving light-
coloured pixels along the edge
of the selected object) and then
Invert the selection. Copy and
7
Paste the frame into the working
canvas as a new layer at the top
of the layer stack. Name this layer
Ornamental:Forehead and ensure
the Layer Mode is set to Normal.
Once that’s done, Scale, Rotate
and position the Forehead layer
over the girl’s face. Use a layer
mask to remove the left and right
sides and bottom edge of the
frame. Duplicate the layer and set
the duplicated layer’s Mode to
Dodge. Dodging the copy over a
desaturated Normal Mode original
enhances contrast (which makes it
look shinier).
Blending to remove excess details
The ornaments didn’t cover as
much of the girl’s hair as I’d
originally thought it would, so to
get rid of these unsightly blemishes
on our goddess, it’s time to turn
our attention to the Eraser and
Smudge tools.
Smudging in the edge detect
layers is possible (white and black
smudged together produce shades
of gray), but I’d rather leave some
of the line details in the face. To
accomplish that, I’ll use the Eraser
with a Grunge brush and set
the Brush Dynamics to increase
Opacity, Hardness and Size when
pressure is applied using my
Wacom pad. It’s worth mentioning
here that throughout this project
I haven’t needed to break out the
pad, but this is one place where it
comes in handy. If you don’t have
a graphics tablet to hand, you can
just use a smaller brush and vary
the Opacity manually.
Now I apply the Eraser to each
edge-detect layer in turn, starting
with the upper layers. I do only a
small amount on each layer before
moving to the next, then rotate
back to the top and repeat. My
goal is to try and keep as much of
the detail as possible while losing
the obvious hair lines.
Never miss another issue Subscribe to the #1 source for Linux on p102.
84     LXF121 August 2009
LXF121.tut_gimp 84
www.linuxformat.com
8/6/09 11:27:39 am
Gimp Tutorial
8
Smudging out excess hair
Removing the hair also means Girl
layer comes back into view. Now
switch off the visibility of the three
edge detection-related layers and
turn on the visibility of the Girl
layer. Enable the Layer Lock for the
Girl layer and then use the Smudge
tool with any appropriate brush to
blend the hair out of this layer. Try
to keep the lighting smooth across
the cheek by clicking in lighter
areas first (the cheek) and
dragging into darker areas (the
10
9
hair). Smudge the neck and
clothing as well.
With the Layer Lock enabled,
you don’t have to avoid smudging
outside the girl’s outline. While this
is something I desired for this
project, you could express your
creativity by disabling the Lock
and smudging all over the place.
Just be sure to colour the smudged
areas with some fire later. When
you’re done, make the edge
detection layers visible again.
Add flame colouring
Colouring is the next step. The girl
is coloured first, simply by using
Colourise with Hue, Saturation and
Lightness set to 30, 90 and -30,
respectively. Next, a roaring fire
image (flame and black
background) is copied in as a new
layer to the top of the layer stack.
It’s scaled so that the flame fits
completely over the girl, then the
layer is cropped to fit the image
(Layer > Layer to Image Size). Set
the Layer Mode to Hard Light.
When Layer To Image Size is used,
the layer may not span the width of
the image and you’ll see a white
band. If this happens, click the
white band with the Fuzzy Select
tool, Grow by it one pixel and fill the
selection with black.
At this point, the flames obscure
the girl’s face and you have two
options: leave them or use the
Smudge tool on the flame layer to
let the face and ornaments show
through. I chose the latter option.
Create the flaming hat
Finally, we’re at the really fun and
creative part. The process for
creating the fire hat is remarkably
simple, but it will more than likely
take you a couple of attempts to
get it just right. Start with a flame
image like the one shown below – a
flame, not a roaring fire. Copy just
the flame (without the black
background) into the project’s
window. Name the new layer Flame
Hat. Scale this layer to fit from the
girl’s forehead and stretch it to the
top of the image.
Duplicate this layer, flip it
horizontally and position it close
to the original flame layer. Use a
mask to merge the flames together
if necessary. Then merge the two
layers by selecting the top layer
of the two and selecting Layer >
Merge Down. Move the merged
layer to the middle of the image
window and size the layer to the
image (again using Layer > Layer
to Image Size). Now you have the
basic flame hat frame in place with
some space around it to create the
flame swirls.
Use the iWarp filter to create the
flame swirls. Now, here’s the tricky
part. The left side of the hat will be
swirled using the Swirl CW mode
and the right side of the hat will be
swirled using the Swirl CCW mode.
For this particular flame, I found
two spots on each side which
would make good swirls. Clicking
(never dragging) at various points
in the preview, I was able to create
two swirls with a nearly uniform
appearance. Clicking and holding
also works, but you’ll need to hold
for a very short amount of time or
the swirl gets too big.
You should experiment with
the Deform Radius and Deform
Amount while you do this, as well
as where to click in the preview. If
the preview gets messed up, just
hit Reset and try again. It may take
patience, but if you experiment
enough, you’ll get it in the end.
After applying the iWarp
settings to the Flame Hat layer,
position and Rotate the hat in place
over the girl’s head. Set the Layer
Mode to Screen, then add another
copy of the roaring fire above this
layer, scaled so the whole flame
fits inside the hat. Set the Layer
Mode for the roaring fire layer to
screen and use a layer mask to
blend it into the hat.
11
Add Background Emblem
The last step is extremely simple.
To add a sort of Mayan feel to this
project, I selected the Mandala
brush from the Gimp Paint Shop
collection. With the Paintbrush tool
selected, I increased the scale of
the brush until a single brush click
was roughly three quarters of the
size of the image window. Then I
added a transparent layer above
the background, made the
foreground colour white and
clicked once in this new layer.
Above the Mandala imprint, I
once again added the roaring fire
image in a new layer. Scale the fire
to cover most of the imprint and
then set the Layer Mode to
Multiply. And that’s it.
Summary
Earlier I mentioned that I toyed
with the idea of removing the girl
from the image. This didn’t look
right until I added the Mandala
imprint layer and coloured it with
flame. Now when I remove the girl
layer, the imprint shows through,
which looks pretty good. Why not
take this basis and experiment
some more? Soon you’ll have a
great variation on this theme.   LXF
Next month Fire up the dilithium crystals and add a touch of warp speed!
www.tuxradar.com
LXF121.tut_gimp 85
August 2009 LXF121     85
8/6/09 11:27:42 am

