Tutorial Gimp Open source image-editing
Gimp software you can get your teeth into
>>Gimp:开源图像处理软件，值得注目
Gimp:A Bottle of wine
Gimp：一个酒瓶

With a blur, a colourise and some guides, Michael J Hammel uses
digital aging to add style and credits the the wine bottle project.
使用模糊、单色化和一些参考线，迈克尔·J·哈默尔使用？？？（数字化老化处理？数字时代？）为酒瓶项目增色。

This second part of the realistic wine bottle tutorial will
add the final details that make the wine bottle really
come to life. This includes adding a bottle cap along
with integrating some text, adding clip art and merging some
creative photography with the labels. Before we dive into
these though, let’s review what we learned last month in the
first part of the tutorial.
做逼真酒瓶的第二部分指南中，我们要给酒瓶加细节，让它活灵活现。该部分包括加瓶塞（上有装饰和文字），加镂刻装饰，并给标签加上照片。在我们开始前，先来回顾一下上个月第一部分指南的内容。

The most important lesson from last month’s tutorial
focused on using Gimp’s guides and grid for precise
measures and alignment. The outline of the bottle used
guides to place anchors for curved paths. Highlights created
with the Gradient tool in multiple layers were aligned by
simply bounding mouse drags with guides. and guide
intersections made it easy to position project layers. The
guides were positioned to overlap Gimp’s grid so that the
Snap To Grid option would make it easier to drop anchors and
create selections by referencing the guide intersection points.
上个月的指南中最重要的部分，就是使用Gimp的参考线和网格来辅助精确的测量、对齐。画瓶子轮廓用到参考线来辅助画曲线路径的控制点。使用渐变工具在多个图层中创建的高光，使用简单的鼠标拖拽和参考线辅助就完成了对齐。辅助线的交叉点令定位图层变得简单。辅助线和网格重叠了，这样一来，在吸附到网格功能的帮助下，利用参考线交叉点放置控制点和创建选区就更方便了。

Symmetry is your friend
（小标题）对称是你的帮手


Another trick from the first part of this tutorial was to draw
half a bottle, then duplicate and flip it to complete the whole.
Also, colour in each project layer was kept consistent by using
greyscale gradients and tinting these with exact values in the
Colourise dialog. And finally, we set the Levels dialog using
specific input values, rather than referencing inexact settings
for the input sliders.
第一部分还有一个小技巧，那就是画一半瓶子，然后复制、翻转来完成整个瓶子。每层的颜色使用简便和用精确的数值上色的。我们还在色阶对话框设置了特定的输入色阶值，而非使用滑动头大略控制。

Only a few tools were used to create the 3D bottle in the
first part of this tutorial. This next part uses a few more Gimp
features, but these steps won’t all be so precisely set with
guides. Text layers and clip art will be aligned manually, using
nothing more than your own eyes for positioning. Fortunately,
the most complex component of the bottle – the bottle cap –
can be created using the same guide-based methods from
part one of the tutorial.
第一部份的指南在3D化时没有用到太多工具。第二部份使用了另外的几个Gimp的工具，但是步骤没有那么精确，不使用参考线辅助。文字图层和镂刻装饰是手工排放的，只用肉眼定位。所幸瓶子最复杂的部分——瓶塞——可以使用第一部分指南的基于参考线的方法制作。

（Last month We drew the shape of the bottle, then gave it depth and a label.）
（页底1：上个月我们画了瓶子的外型，做了立体化，还加了标签。）

This month the wine bottle will get a bottle cap, some
floral glass etching, and label lettering and imagery. The
techniques you take from this tutorial should help you
become more adept at repeating processes that you can use
in any project.
这个月，酒瓶会拥有一个瓶塞、镂刻装饰，及标签上的字和图片。这些技巧可以帮助你在重复过程中熟悉它们，并用于其他项目。

Before we start, be sure to reset the foreground and
background colours to black/white respectively. All text used
in this part of the tutorial will be based on common fonts
found in all current Linux distributions. Also, immediately
after opening last month’s project file, save the project as a
new name, so if you mess up you can always go back to the
last tutorial’s image and try again.
在我们开始前，记得重置前景色和背景色为黑/白。本部分建立的文本都使用当前Linux配置的字体。在你打开上个月的项目文件时，另存一个新名字，这样你就可以随时回到之前的进度，重新试做了。

Wine bottle cap
（小标题）瓶塞

The bottle cap is made up of four distinct parts:
An angled bottom.
A wide lower band.
Text in the lower band.
A ridged upper band.
瓶塞由四个不同的部分组成：一个有角度的底，一个宽的下方的环，环上的字，一个脊状的上方的环。

The cap will require a new set of guides (you should still have
the guides from part one in your project). Add three vertical
guides (Image > Guides > New Guide) at 365, 380, and 435.
Add four horizontal guides at 35, 45, 65 and 70. Zoom in
(Shift +) so that the top of the bottle and all of the gold
wrapper are visible.
瓶塞需要一系列新参考线（第一部分做的参考线要保留）。加三条垂直线（图像>辅助线>新建参考线），位置在365、380、435。再加四条水平线，位置在35、45、65、70。放大画面（同时按Shift和+），这样瓶子顶部及金色包装就能看清了。

Add a layer to the project and call it Lower Band. Choose
the Path tool from Gimp’s Toolbox. Click on the guide
intersections at 370/70, 365/65, 435/65, and 430/70. In the
Tool Options dialog, click on the Selection from Path button,
then choose the Gradient tool from the Toolbox. Click on the
Reset button at the bottom of the Tool Options dialog. Drag
the image window in from the guide intersections at 380/70
to 380/65.
增加一个叫做“下方的环”的图层。选用路径工具，依次点击交叉点370/70、365/65、 435/65、430/70。在工具选项对话框中，选择从路径创建选区，然后选择渐变工具。［译者注：文中混合工具、渐变工具、混合填充都是同一个功能。］点击对话框底部的重置到默认值。从点380/70至380/65拖一个渐变。

Choose the Rectangle Select tool from the Toolbox.
Working in the same layer, drag a selection from the
intersection of guides at 365/40 to 435/70. This will
temporarily overlap the gradient from the last step. Hit Enter
to accept this selection. Round the corners of the selection
(Select > Rounded Rectangle) by 50%. In the Tool Options
dialog, set the Mode to Subtract. Drag a selection from the
guides intersecting at 365/65 to 435/70. Hit Enter to use this
selection to cut off the bottom of the first selection.
使用矩形选区工具，在同一图层中，从365/40到435/70拖一个选区。这个选区会暂时覆盖上一步的渐变。按下回车确认选区，倒圆角（选择>圆角矩形）50%。在工具选项对话框中，选择从当前选区中减去模式。从365/65到435/70拖一个选区，按下回车来从上一个选区中切掉这一块。

Choose the Gradient tool from the Toolbox. In the Tool
Options dialog set the Shape to Bi-linear and click on the
Reverse button. Drag from the guides interesting at 390/45 to
435/45. Clear all selections (Ctrl+Shift+A or Select > None).
Open the Colourise dialog (Colours > Colourise) and set the
Hue to 50, the Saturation to 86 and the Lightness to 0.
选择渐变工具，模式设置为对称线性，打开反向。从390/45拖到435/45.取消所有选区（Ctrl+Shift+A或者选择>全部不选）。打开单色化对话框（颜色>单色化），色调设为50,饱和度设为86,亮度设为0。

In the layers dialog, set the Lock Alpha Channel button.
This will ensure that transparent pixels stay transparent as we
complete this part of the tutorial. Choose the Paintbrush from
the Toolbox. Click on the Reset button in the Tool Options
dialog. Set the Mode to Overlay and choose the Circle (03)
brush, then set the Use Colour from Gradient button and
choose the FG to BG (RGB) gradient. Click on the Reverse
button, set the Length to 50 pixels, and in the image window
draw from Guide intersection at 365/65 to 435/65
在图层对话框中，勾选锁定Alpha通道键，这能保证透明像素在整个作图过程中一直保持透明。选择画笔工具，点击重置到默认值，设置模式为覆盖，选择circle（03）画笔，勾选使用渐变中的颜色，选择前景到背景（RBG）渐变。点击重置到默认值，长度为50像素，在图像窗口从365/65画到435/65。

The wide lower band of the cap now gets a strip of writing.
Choose the Text Tool from the Toolbox. Set the Font to Serif
Bold Italic, the size to eight pixels and the colour to Black.
Click in the image window to open the text editor window and
type the name of our vineyard – “Penguin Fields”.
宽的下方环现在有了一条可以写字的地方。选择文字工具，设置字体为Serif Bold Italic，大小为8像素，颜色为黑色。在图像窗口单击打开文字编辑窗口，打出葡萄园的名字——“Penguin Fields”。

（页底2：如果你没有收到上一期，请致电0870 837 4773或+44 1858 438795）

We’ll have to position the text by hand, so turn off the
Snap To Guides option (View > Snap to Guides). Use the
Move tool to drag the layer into the centre of the Lower Band.
Once positioned, turned the Snap To Guides back on.
文字要手动放置，关掉吸附到参考线选项（查看>吸附到参考线）。使用移动工具把图层拖到下方的环的中间。放好后，重新打开吸附到参考线。

Choose the Shear Tool from the Toolbox. Click in the
image window to open the Shear dialog. Set the Shear
Magnitude Y to -7 and click on the Shear button to apply the
effect. Turn on the Layer Lock Alpha Channel. Set the
Foreground colour to Red 171, Green 151 and
Blue 57. Drag this colour from the FG box in
the Toolbox to the image window to colour
the text. Set the layer mode for the text
layer to Multiply and the Opacity to 70%.
选择切变工具，单击图像窗口打开切变对话框。设置切变量Y为-7,点击按钮应用效果。打开图层的锁定Alpha通道按钮。设置前景色为红171、绿151、蓝57。把这个颜色从前景色拖到图像窗口来给文字上色。设置图层模式为相乘，不透明度为70%。

The next thing we’re going to do is add a
ridged upper band to the top of the cap.
Add a layer to the image (Layer > New) and
call it Upper Band. Choose the Rectangle
Select tool from the Toolbox. Click on the
Reset button in the Tool Options dialog.
Choose the Rounded Corners option. Drag
the selection from the guides intersecting at
370/35 to 430/40. Use the Tool Options
dialog to position the selection at 370/37.
Hit Enter to accept the selection.
接下来我们要做脊状上方环了，它位于瓶塞顶部。新建图层（图层>新建图层），命名为“上方的环”。使用矩形选区工具，点击重置到默认值按钮。勾选圆角，从370/35到430/40拖一个选区，将位置改为370/37。按下回车确认选区。

Reset the foreground and background
colours in the Toolbox. Choose the Gradient
tool from the Toolbox. Hit Reset in the Tool
Options, the set the Shape to bi-linear and
click on the Reverse button. Drag in the image window from
the guides intersecting at 390/45 to 430/45. Reset the Tool
Options again. Set the Mode to Overlay and Opacity to 70%.
Choose the Blinds gradient and click on the Reverse button.
Set the Shape to Bi-linear and the Repeat to Triangular Wave.
If the Dithering option is not set, click on it. Drag from the
guides intersection at 400/45 to 390/45.
重置前景色和背景色，选择混合工具。点击重置到默认值，选择对称线性形状，点击反向。从390/45到430/45拖一个渐变。再次重置。把模式改为覆盖，不透明度改为70%。选择？？？渐变，再重置，设置对称线性形状，将重复设置为三角波。如果抖动选项没有打开，就打开它。从400/45拖到390/45。

Open the Colourise dialog and set the Hue to 50, the
Saturation to 86 and the Lightness to 0, then apply this to the
selection. Once again, enable the Lock Alpha Channel for this
layer in the Layers dialog. Open the Motion Blur (Filters > Blur
> Motion Blur) filter. Set the length to 2 and Angle to 6 and
apply the blur. In the Layers dialog, move the Upper Band
layer below the Lower Band layer. Remove the selection
(Select > None).
打开单色化对话框，设置色调为50,饱和度为86,亮度为0,应用到选区。再一次锁定Alpha通道。打开动态模糊（滤镜>模糊>动态模糊），设置长度为2,角度为6,应用模糊。在图层对话框中，把上方的环图层放在下方的环图层的下面。取消选区（选择>全部不选）。

Floral/fruit etching
（小标题）花/果镂刻
The next step involves the use of clip art. I’m using a
vector image from iStockPhoto converted to JPEG,
cropped and scaled to 200 wide by 70 pixels high.
Add a horizontal guide at 300 and a vertical guide
at 300 for this step. Copy the clip art image into the
wine bottle image and name the clip art layer
“Grapes” Move this layer just above the White Label
layer in the Layers dialog. Use the Move tool to drag
the Grapes layer in the image window so the top of
the layer aligns with the guides intersecting at
300/300. This will place half of the grapes layer
over the White Label and half over the glass bottle.
下一步是做镂刻装饰。我使用了一副由iStockPhoto转换为JPEG的矢量图，剪切并把比例变成宽200像素、高70像素。添加300的水平线和300的垂直线。把镂刻装饰图复制进酒瓶图中，将图层命名为“葡萄”。把这个图层挪到白色标签图层上面。使用移动工具拖拽葡萄图层，使图层顶部与300/300点对齐。这样，葡萄图层的一半就会在白色标签上方，另一半遮盖着玻璃瓶身。

Set the Mode for the layer to Multiply then duplicate this
layer (Layer > Duplicate Layer). The duplicate layer name will
be “Grapes Copy” Set the layer Mode for Grapes Copy to
Dodge. Invert the colours of the duplicate layer (Colours >
Invert). Click on the original Grapes layer in the Layers dialog
to make it the active layer and add a black layer mask (Layer
> Mask > Add Layer Mask). Add a white layer mask to the
Grapes Copy layer.
将模式改为相乘，然后复制图层（图层>复制图层）。复制的图层叫做“葡萄副本”。设置葡萄副本图层的模式为掩蔽。将该图层颜色反相（颜色>反相）。点回原本的葡萄图层，增添一个黑色的图层蒙板（图层>蒙板>添加蒙板）。为葡萄副本图层添加白色蒙板。

Click on the White Label layer in the Layers dialog and
then create a selection from its alpha channel (Layer >
Transparency > Alpha to Selection). Click on the Grapes Copy
layer mask in the Layers dialog. Fill the selection with black.
Click on the Grapes layer mask and fill with white.
点击白色标签图层，从alpha通道创建一个选区（图层>透明>Alpha到选区）。点击葡萄副本图层蒙板，填充选区为黑色。点击葡萄图层蒙板，填充为白色。




（页底3：不要错过另一期。在第6页订阅#1 source for Linux。）

Use the Rectangle Select tool to make a selection starting
at the guides intersecting at 320/300 to 480/370. Invert this
selection. Fill the selection with black (this masks off the
white edges of the grapes layer that overhang the bottle).
Click on the Grapes Copy layer mask and fill the selection
with black again. Clear the selection (Select > None).
拖一个320/300到480/370的矩形选区，然后反向。填充选区为黑色（这可以蒙掉葡萄图层伸出瓶子的白边）。点击葡萄副本图层蒙板，再次填充选区为黑色。取消选区（选择>全部不选）。

Lettering
（小标题）加文字
Text is now added to the White Label layer. To make this easier, 
only fonts available on most modern Linux distributions have
been used. To position the text, disabled the Snap to Grid and
Snap to Guides options in the View menu.
现在要给白色标签加文字。为了做得方便，只使用大部分现行Linux配置自带的字体。取消吸附到网格和吸附到参考线，这样更方便放置文字。

Click on the White Label layer in the layers dialog. Choose
the Text tool from the toolbox and then click in the image to
open the Text Editor. Type in “2005 Merlot” (or whatever year
and variety your palate prefers) and close the editor dialog. In
the Tool Options dialog set the Font to “URW Palladio L Bold
Italic” and the size to 14 pixels. Use the Move tool to manually
drag the text layer in the image window to the bottom-centre
of the White Label.
点击白色标签图层。选用文字工具，单击图像窗口打开文字编辑器。输入“2005 Merlot（或者随便什么你喜欢的年份、口味）”，关闭编辑对话框。在工具选项对话框中设置字体为URW Palladio L Bold Italic，字号为14像素。使用移动工具手动把文字图层移到白色标签的中下方。

Choose the Text tool again and click on the
image anywhere outside of the “2005 Merlot”
layer boundary. The text editor dialog will open
again. Type in “Red Aspen” and close the dialog.
In the Tool Options set the Font to URW Palladio
L Bold and the size to 23 pixels. Use the Move
tool to manually align the text in the centre of
the White Label.
再使用文字工具，在“2005 Merlot”以外的地方单击。在再次出现的文字编辑对话框中输入“Red Aspen”并关闭对话框。设置字体为URW Palladio L Bold，字号为23像素。使用移动工具手动将文字放在白色标签的中心。

The country of origin is next, though I’ll use
my US state instead. Choose the Text tool and
click in the image again. In the Text Editor type
“Colorado” and close the dialog. In the Tool
Options set the Font to “Nimbus Roman No9 L
Bold Italic” the size to 18 pixels and the colour
to black. Use the Move tool to centre this layer
in the image window between the two gold
stripes that separate the White Label from thee
Blue Stripe. Set the layer boundary to match
the image size (Layer > Layer to Image Size).
接下来加产地（国家），我会用一个US的州代替。再次打开文字编辑对话框，输入“Colorado”并关闭对话框，设置字体为Nimbus Roman No9 L Bold Italic，字号为18像素，颜色为黑色。用移动工具把图层放在两条金色装饰条（这两条即是隔开白色标签和蓝色标签的条带）之间。设置图层边界来匹配图片大小（图层>图层到图像大小）。

The next step is to Duplicate this layer and
invert the colours so that the text is white.
Offset this layer (Layer > Transform > Offset)
by one pixel in both the X and Y directions.
Apply a Gaussian Blur (Filters > Blur >
Gaussian Blur) of one pixel to both layers.
下面要复制图层，反相颜色（使之变为白色）。偏移图层（图层>变换>位移），X、Y方向各1像素。对两个图层都应用高斯模糊（滤镜>模糊>高斯模糊）1像素。

Blue stripe graphic
（小标题）标签蓝色部分上的图
The last piece of this project is to integrate a graphic into the
Blue Strip layer. I’ve used a photo of the mall area of
Queenstown, New Zealand here, but anything with trees in will
do just as well for your own design. The image is desaturated
first (Colours > Desaturate) and contrast adjusted (Colours >
Brightness-Contrast). It is then scaled to fit the size of the
blue stripe exactly: 160 pixels wide by 65 pixels tall. The image
is copied into the wine bottle project and manually positioned
over the Blue Stripe. Finally, the layer mode for the graphic is
set to Soft Light. 
本项目最后一部分是给蓝色标签上添上图片。我使用了一张新西兰昆士顿的步行街照片。不过随便哪个有树的图都可以。图片先要去色（颜色>去色），然后做对比度调整（颜色>亮度-对比度）。接下来要调整比例来使尺寸合宜：160像素宽，65像素高。图片要复制到酒瓶项目中，手动调整位置覆盖在蓝色标签上。最后，调整图层模式为柔光。

Drawing tips
（左下的框）作图小技巧
1 Too many guides clutter
the view. Use Image > New
View to get a clear view of
your work without guides
by turning off the guides.
2 The highlights come from
blurs, and those may
overlap the edges of the
bottle. Add a mask to those
layers and use the bottle
layer to get a selection, then
invert it and fill the mask
with black.
3 Save selections if you
need to create multiple
masks with that shape.
4 Image too small for
print? Scale it up before
adding text. Scaling the
shape and colours will work
fine but scaling the text will
leave you with blurred text
1.太多的参考线干扰视野。使用查看>新建视图可使视野清晰，而不用关掉参考线。
2.高光由模糊制得，然而模糊效果可能遮盖瓶子边缘。给高光图层加蒙板。可用瓶子图层先获取一个选区并反向，然后填充蒙板为黑色。
3.如果你在做蒙板时多次要用到某个选区，可以存储选区。
4.对于打印来说图片是否太小？你可以将其在添加文字前放大。缩放时，形状和颜色不会有问题，但是缩放会使文字变模糊。

（Next month We’ll integrate Gimp with multiple desktop applications.）
（页底4：下个月我们会结合使用Gimp和几种桌面应用程序。）

(The Lower Band layer is used for both the angled bottom
and wide lower band components of the cap.)
（插话：下方的环图层，是瓶塞的有角度的底，和宽的下方环这两部分组成的。）

(Drawing the a line across the
bottom of the cap enhances
the bottom edge of the cap.)
（插话：画一条瓶塞底部的线能突出瓶塞的下底。）

（Many of the details in the cap will only be appreciated
when viewed with the final image as a whole.）
（插话：瓶塞上的许多细节在最终整个图完成后，完整地看才能看出效果。）

（The band was
blurred to soften
the ridges, giving
them a rounded
appearance.）
（插话：对环做模糊处理以使脊变得柔和，看起来圆润一些。）

（The grapes
used for the
etching are in
vector format.
Look on iStockPhoto.com
and search for
6665569, the file
number of the
Grape Ornaments
image.）
（插话：葡萄图片是矢量格式的。在iStockPhoto.com搜索6665569这个文件号，就能搜到葡萄装饰图。）

（As with Photoshop and Illustrator, the key to doing
anything advanced in Gimp is the Layers dialog.）
（插话：与Photoshop和Illustrator相比，在Gimp中更高级地做图的关键就是图层对话框。）

（An extra step could be added here to apply colour to the Colorado
layer to match the gold trim, but the detail doesn’t show up well in print.）
（插话：此处可另加一步，将颜色赋给Colorado图层，以搭配金色装饰条。但在打印图中，细节效果不明显。）

（If you use a photo on
your wine label, be sure
to avoid anything with
factories, chimney stacks
or technology!）
（如果你在酒瓶标签上使用照片，不要使用工厂、烟囱或工艺相关的图！）
