Tutorial Gimp Open source image-editing
Gimp software you can get your teeth into
>>Gimp:开源图像处理软件，值得注目
Gimp: use other tools
Gimp:使用其他工具

Mixing raster, vector and text is easier than you think. Michael J Hammel explains how to integrate Gimp with Inkscape, Scribus and OpenOffice.org.
混合位图、矢量和文字比你想象的简单。迈克尔·J·哈默尔讲解如何将Inkscape、Scribus、OpenOffice.org与Gimp搭配使用。

While a vast number of desktop users are content to
work with the Gimp to produce images for the
web, many have more varied needs. Cartoonists
need vector support to tweak drawings, office workers need
images for presentations and desktop publishing requires
both. Gimp can fill the needs of all these users. In fact, Gimp
integrates easily with many desktop applications; the trick is
to understand the requirements of each application and the
reason we use them.
虽然大量桌面用户对于使用Gimp制作图片感到满意，但是许多人还有其他需求。漫画家需要矢量工具来调整图画，办公室职员需要为演示做图，桌面排版则两个都需要。Gimp可以满足这些用户的需求。事实上，Gimp和其他许多桌面应用程序都可以配合使用。技巧就是要理解每种程序的要求，以及使用它们的原因。

This month we’re going to learn how to integrate Gimp
with three popular Linux desktop tools: Inkscape, Scribus and
OpenOffice.org. We’ll learn how to use the exported output
from any one application with the Gimp and how each can
import Gimp images. Where applicable we’ll also discuss use
of drag and drop between applications.
这个月我们要学习将Gimp和三种流行的Linux桌面工具结合，它们分别是Inkscape、Scribus和OpenOffice.org。我们要了解如何在Gimp中使用这三个程序输出的文件，以及这三个程序怎样载入Gimp图片。有些地方我们还会讨论到在程序间如何做取舍。

A common thread in this discussion is file formats. Gimp
works with many formats, including GIF, JPEG, PNG and TIFF
and can import both PostScript and SVG vector formats.
While JPEG and GIF suffice for the web, TIFF or PNG are
better choices when working on print documents. PNG is also
preferable for digital presentations, because its lossless
format is better suited to dynamic scaling and it offers a
range of transparency effects. Where EXIF data from digital
cameras needs to be retained, the TIFF format is often the
best choice. TIFF is also preferred for work that needs to use
alternate colour spaces, such as CMYK. For vector formats,
SVG is the best option for export or import between multiple
applications, though support for PostScript import might be of
higher quality in some cases.
讨论过程中的常识是文件格式。Gimp支持多种格式，包括GIF、JPEG、PNG和TIFF，并能导入PostScript和SVG矢量文件。JPEG和GIF适合网络使用，而TIFF和PNG适合印刷文档使用。PNG还适合数字演示，因为它是无损格式，适合随时调整比例，还具有透明度可变的效果。数码相机的EXIF数据需要保留时，TIFF格式就是最好的选择。TIFF还适合要用到不同颜色空间（例如CMYK）的项目。对于矢量格式来说，SVG适应在多个程序间导入导出，不过有些情况下PostScript导入会更高质量。

Another common issue is dpi settings. For the web and
digital presentations 72dpi or 96dpi is fine. However, if you’re
printing, consider the quality of the output. A low 150dpi will do
for a flyer for the local children’s choir, while the high-end
restaurant menu is better served by 300dpi.
另一个常识是dpi设置。对于网络和数字演示来说，72dpi或96dpi就够了。但如果需要印刷，就要考虑输出文件的质量。当地儿童唱诗班的传单使用150dpi就够了，但是高档餐厅的菜单最好使用300dpi。

Keep these common threads in mind as we explore the
integration of the Gimp with Inkscape, a popular open source
vector graphic illustration tool.
把这些常识记住，然后我们来探索一下Gimp和Inkscape的综合使用。后者是一个开源矢量图形编辑工具。

Gimp and Inkscape
（小标题）Gimp和Inkscape

Gimp does wonders with pixels, but working with text is often
more than pixel editing. The latest version of Gimp enables you
to transform a text layer into a path so that the text can be
manipulated manually, but this isn’t Gimp’s forte. It’s best to
leave it to a vector tool such as Inkscape.
Gimp处理像素很不错，但对文字的处理不只是像素编辑这么简单。Gimp的最新版本允许你将一个文字图层变成路径，这样你就可以手动调整文字了。但这不是Gimp的强项。最好还是把这步留给专门的矢量工具吧，例如Inkscape。

Inkscape’s text management features are more extensive
than Gimp’s and enable easy creation of text along a curve
with kerning adjustments. We’ll now look at how to do this and
how to adjust the the spacing of the letters, before we move
the text into the Gimp.
Inkscape的文字处理功能比Gimp更丰富，可以方便地利用曲线和字距调整来创建文本。现在我们来看看怎么做，来看看怎么调整字距。做好后，可以将文本挪入Gimp。

Start up Inkscape and you’ll see a blank page. Now choose
the Text tool from the toolbar and type ‘Integrating Gimp with
Inkscape’ Use the Select tool to position the text in the centre
 of the top half of the page. Next, choose the Bézier tool. Click
in the canvas once, then click again but drag before releasing
to create a curve. Release the mouse button, then click and
drag in one more spot. Release the mouse button and hit
Enter to complete the curve.
启动Inkscape后，你会看到一个空白页。从工具条中选择文本工具，输入“Integrating Gimp with Inkscape”。使用选择工具来定位文本于页面中心的上半部分。接下来，选择贝塞尔工具。单击画布，然后再次点住，并在释放前拖出一个曲线。释放鼠标按键，然后再拖一个点。放开鼠标按键，按下回车完成曲线。

(Last month We drank a toast to the completion of the wine bottle tutorial.)
（页底1：上个月我们为了酒瓶的指南完结而干杯。）

As a vector tool Inkscape creates objects, and selecting
these is similar to selecting a path in Gimp. Use the Select
tool and click on an object to select it. To place the text along
the curve, first choose the Select tool from the Toolbox and
then click on the text. Hold down the Shift key and click on
the curve. Now both objects are selected. Under the Text
menu at the top of the Inkscape window, choose ‘Put on Path’.
作为一个矢量工具Inkscape创建了目标。目标选择和在Gimp中选择一个路径类似。使用选择工具，单击目标就可以选择它。要把文字放在曲线上，先要从工具箱中选中选择工具，在文字上单击。按住Shift键，再单击曲线。这就同时选中了这两个对象。在文字菜单（在Inkscape窗口顶部）中，选择“放置在路径上”。

The text is aligned from left to right along the curve.
The text on the path is still in vector format, so it can be
edited some more. First we must expand the space between
letters to flow the entire distance of the curve. Choose the
Text tool from the toolbar and then click anywhere in the text
object. Hold down the Alt key and use the < and > keys (and
possibly the Shift key, depending on your keyboard layout) to
proportionally decrease or increase the space between
letters. Adjusting space in this way is known as kerning. Note
that the space between letters is not exactly the same. The
space is adjusted based on the two letters that bound it. This
produces a more natural flow for the letters.
文字从左到右对齐并附着在曲线上。路径上的文字依旧是矢量格式，所以还能继续编辑。首先要扩大字距以适应曲线的整个长度。选择文字工具，随便在文字对象上单击一下。按住Alt键，使用< and >？？？键（或者和Shift键一起用，这根据你的键盘排布而定）来等比例缩小或放大字距。这种调整方法叫kerning。注意字母间的距离不完全一样。距离是根据相邻的两个字母来调整的。这种调整可以生成一串更自然的文字。

A leading question
行间距问题

While both Gimp and Inkscape can adjust letter spacing, only
Inkscape makes it easy to adjust the vertical positioning of
letters. Use the arrow keys to move the text cursor in front of
the ‘I’ in ‘Inkscape’ Hold down Shift and use the Right arrow to
select the letters ‘Ink’ Hold down the Alt key and then tap the
Up arrow 24 times. Still holding Alt, tap the Right arrow 15
times. The letters move vertically and to the right, positioned
above the remaining letters.
虽然Gimp和Inkscape都可以调整字距，但是只有Inkspace可以便捷地调整字母间的垂直距离。使用方向键移动光标，放在“Inkscape”的“I”前面。按住Shift，使用右箭头来选择“Ink”，按下Alt键，敲击上箭头24下。继续按住Alt键，按右箭头15下。字垂直运动，并且向右运动，位置在剩余的字上方。

If no letters had been selected then all characters after the
text cursor would have been moved (try this to see what
happens to the ‘e’ in ‘Inkscape’!). Similarly, if there had been
multiple lines of text, the spacing between the lines could
have been edited using Ctrl+Alt and the < and > keys.
如果没有选中文字，那么所有光标后的字母都会移动（试一试，看看Inkscape中的e会怎么样）。同样的，如果文字有多行，那么行间距也可以用Ctrl+Alt和 < and > 调整。


To move this curved text to Gimp, save it in Inkscape and
load the file into Gimp manually. We have to do this because
drag and drop between the two doesn’t work with a vector
text object, and the Inkscape project can’t be saved to file and
opened in Gimp as the text isn’t yet in a path format.
要将这个扭曲过的文字挪入Gimp，先在Inkscape中保存，然后手动导入到Gimp。必须这样做，因为两者间的导入导出不是一个矢量文字对象直接能完成的，Inkscape文件对象不能存成文件然后直接被Gimp打开，因为文字还不是路径格式。

Ideally text should be in path format for use in Gimp. To do
this, select the text object in Inkscape then click on the Path >
Object To Path menu option. Now save the project to a file.
The default format for Inkscape project files is SVG, which is
what’s required for importing into Gimp.
所需的文字应该是Gimp能用的路径格式。要达成这个条件，在Inkscape中选中文字，点击路径>对象至路径菜单项。这下子再保存对象为文件。Inkscape默认保存格式是SVG，可以导入Gimp。

Open the file in Gimp. Don’t worry about the Page Size
dialog that appears, as Inkscape’s default page size will
import to 744x1052 pixels at 90dpi. Note that once you
become more familiar with Inkscape you may want to make
changes to the size of the image when opening it. More
important here is to make sure that the Import Paths option
in this dialog is set, but not the Merge Imported Paths option.
The former allows for the text to be imported as a path in the
Gimp, and having it in a path allows us to scale it without
losing the quality of the rendered text.
在Gimp中打开文件。不用担心页面大小对话框，因为Inkscape的默认页面大小会导入成744x1052,90dpi。注意，一旦你熟悉了Inkscape，你可能想改变打开时的大小。更重要的是要保证选用导入路径选项，而非合并导入路径选项。前者使文字作为路径导入，并且可以在缩放时保持质量。

We can convert the path to a selection to fill it later on, or it
can be stroked after scaling. Don’t merge the paths from
Inkscape, because the curve itself (the curved line around
which the text is formed) is included with the curved text.
我们还可以把路径变成选区，并填充，或者在更改比例后打散。不要合并路径，因为曲线（文字旁边的曲线）包含在弯曲的文字内。

Half the job of migrating vector images from Inkscape to
Gimp is integrating these desktop tools. Inkscape can load
raster images created with Gimp. Since the images are linked
rather than embedded into an Inkscape project, changes
made to the Gimp image will cause the Inkscape project to be
updated the next time it’s reopened. It’s also possible to drag
Gimp layers directly into Inkscape, although doing so embeds
the image in the project file, with the consequence that later
updates to the layer won’t show up in the Inkscape file.
把矢量图从Inkscape移动到Gimp的工作中，一半是综合使用这些桌面工具。Inkscape可以导入Gimp制作的位图。图片更像是链接到Inkscape项目而非嵌入之，因为对Gimp图片做的改动会令Inkscape项目在下次被打开时更新。我们还可以把Gimp的图层直接拖入Inkscape，虽然这样做把图片嵌入到了项目文件，其结果就是之后更新时图层不会在Inkscape文件中显示出来。

Vector artwork, such as cartoons, are often drawn using
tools such as Inkscape and painted in Gimp. The process for
migrating this from Inkscape to Gimp is similar to working
with text along a curve, without needing to convert the text an
object before saving the Inkscape project. Once imported, the
vector paths can be stroked or converted to a selection and
filled with solid colours, gradients and patterns. Making the
selection and filling it with a gradient is easier in the Gimp
because there’s no need to mask objects, as there would be if
the process were done in Inkscape.
矢量作品，例如漫画，常常是用Inkscape画完后用Gimp上色。转移文件的过程类似处理含曲线的文字，不过不需要在保存前将文字变为对象。导入后，矢量路径可以打散或变为选区并填色、填充渐变、填充图案。在Gimp中做选区并填充更简单，因为不需要做蒙板。在Inkscape中就需要蒙住对象。

Gimp and Scribus
（小标题）Gimp和Scribus

Scribus is a page layout tool, meaning it’s useful for creating
posters and flyers, among many other types of print media. It
benefits Gimp users in its support for duotone, tritone and
quadtone images – these are halftone images printed with
two, three or four inks. A halftone image is a single-colour
image created with collections of dots. The primary purpose
of a duotone is to bring out midtone and highlights in an
image. Tritone and quadtone processes increase depth, effect
and quality. Duotone images are less expensive to produce in
large-quantity, high-quality print runs.
Scribus是页面排版工具，适合做海报、传单，以及很多其他印刷媒体。它对Gimp用户的有利之处在于支持双色、三色、四色图片-有一些半色调图片用二、三甚至四色墨水印刷。半色调图是用单一色彩、点的集合印成的。双色的主要功能在于提供图片的中间色调和高光。三色和四色加入了深度、效果和质量。双色图片在大量、高质量印刷中较为便宜。

(If you missed last issue Call 0870 837 4773 or +44 1858 438795.
)
（页底2：如果你错过了上一期，拨打0870 837 4773或+44 1858 438795。）

Scribus enables you to easily create this type of image and
can convert existing Gimp images likewise. Scribus starts
with a blank page, much like Inkscape. Click Insert > Insert
Image Frame to add a frame then drag through the page with
the mouse to size it. The initial size doesn’t matter, we’ll resize
it to fit the image in a moment.
Scribus可以让你简便地创建这种图片，并同样可以挪入Gimp。Stribus开始时也是空白页面，和Inkscape很像。点击插入>插入画框来添加一个画框，然后拖动页面改变大小。初始大小并不重要，我们会重新定大小，以符合使用的图片。

Right-click in the image frame to open a menu. Select Get
Image, then choose an image saved from Gimp. Scribus
supports many raster formats including JPEG, PNG and TIFF.
For the purposes of this tutorial, the image shown is 237x238
pixels. The image will be placed in the image frame but may
not fit exactly. Right-click on the image and select Adjust
Frame to Image to shrink or grow the frame as is appropriate
to fit the image.
在画框中单机鼠标右键打开菜单。选择加入图片，然后选择一个由Gimp存好的图。Scribus支持很多种位图格式例如JPEG、PNG和TIFF。本指南中，图片是237x238像素的。图放入画框后，尺寸可能匹配不好。右键单击图片，选择调整画框到图片，来缩小或放大画框，以适应图片大小。

Scribus provides a limited but powerful set of image
effects. In the same right-click menu, select Image Effects to
open the Image Effects dialog. Select Duotone and click on
the ‘>>’ button to add it as an effect. The Options area of the
dialog enables you to choose the two colours to use for the
duotone. To achieve good midtone and highlights, choose a
high-contrast set of colours, including one that’s black. To
reduce printing costs, pick pure Cyan, Magenta, Yellow or
Black. Tritone and Quadtone can be created in the same way.
Scribus提供了不多但很有效的图片效果。依旧在右键菜单中，选择图片效果，打开图片效果对话框。选择双色，点击“>>”来添加为一种效果。对话框的选项区域允许你选择双色的两中颜色。要实现好的中间色调和高光效果，可以选一个高对比颜色设置，例如其中一个颜色设置为黑色。要减少印刷开支，选纯的青色、品红、黄色或者黑色。三色和四色可以通过相同方法创建。

Scribus makes integration with Gimp easy, however it’s a
one-way integration. By default, the Scribus external tool for
editing raster images is Gimp, but this can be changed in the
Preferences dialog. With the image converted to duotone, it
can be edited directly in the Gimp. In the right-click menu
choose Edit Image. Because the image is linked to the Scribus
document and not embedded in it, the image that’s opened is
the one saved to disk, so the duotone effect is not directly
editable in the Gimp. Instead, export the page to an image file
by clicking File > Export > Save As Image. While there’s a
method of exporting just the image object, it requires the use
of the Crop tool in the Gimp Toolbox to clip the duotone
image out of the exported image from Scribus.
Stribus和Gimp很方便一同使用，但那是单向的配合。默认情况下，Stribus要编辑位图时，使用的外部工具是Gimp，但这可以在首选项中更改。当图像变为双色时，可在Gimp中直接编辑。在右键菜单中选择编辑图像。因为链接到Scribus的文件还没有嵌入，打开的图片是存盘了的，所以双色效果不是在Gimp中可直接编辑的。事实上，应导出页面为图片文件（文件>导出>存储为图片）。还有一种方法是只导出图片对象的，这种方法要求使用Gimp中的剪切工具来从Scribus导出的图片中剪取双色图像。

Gimp and OpenOffice.org
（小标题）Gimp和OpenOffice.org
OpenOffice.org is a collection of office applications for word
processing, basic drawing, presentations and spreadsheets.
Each one supports the use of raster image files in various
formats and with varying amounts of image editing features.

OpenOffice.org是一个办公室软件的集合，包含文字处理、基本绘图、演示和电子表格。每种功能都支持多种格式的位图，并具有多种图像处理功能。

Layers from Gimp images can be dragged directly into all
of these applications. Dragging a layer embeds the graphic in
the OpenOffice.org application file. Alternatively, save a Gimp
image to any common raster file format, then manually open
it in an OpenOffice.org application. This process links the file
so that changes to the Gimp image are picked up the next
time OpenOffice.org is started.
Gimp的图层可直接托拽进这些软件中。拖入土层就将图形嵌入了OpenOffice.org文件。你也可以把Gimp图随便存一种常用的位图格式，然后在OpenOffice.org中手动打开。这个过程链接了文件，在Gimp中做的改变，下一次打开OpenOffice.org时就会生效。

If you drag layers into an OpenOffice.org application, the
dpi settings from the Gimp image aren’t imported. If you want
the dpi settings to be honoured by OpenOffice.org, save the
Gimp file to disk first.
你托拽图层进入OpenOffice.org时，Gimp中的dpi设置并不一同导入。如果你想将之沿用，那就要在Gimp中先存盘。

There are no special tricks to using Gimp images in
OpenOffice.org applications, but a little imagination can make
using Gimp with OpenOffice.org more creative. For example,
you can create various types of backgrounds with gradients,
outlines and patterns in Gimp and dragged into Impress
presentations on a slide-by-slide basis. Creative banners can
be added to Calc spreadsheets, and you can size to fit
cascading screenshots of desktop application windows for
print documentation using dpi settings in Gimp.
在OpenOffice.org中使用Gimp图片并无特殊技巧，但是想象力可以让应用更具创造力。比如说，你可以用Gimp渐变、轮廓和图案做很多背景，再拖入演示文档，作为幻灯片的底板。在计算表格中可加入横幅。还可以用Gimp的dpi设置，在用桌面应用程序窗口做印刷文件时，更改尺寸来匹配瀑布流画面。

（Never miss another issue Subscribe to the #1 source for Linux on page 6.）
（页底3：不要错过另一期：在第6页订阅#1 source for Linux。）

The Gimp’s editing features are far more extensive than
any of the OpenOffice.org applications alone provide – it’s a
matter of using the right tool for the job.
Gimp的编辑功能比OpenOffice.org丰富得多——这只是选择合适工具的问题。

Draw is a less sophisticated graphics tool than Gimp, but it
does offer some interesting features. Any 2D graphic can be
quickly mapped to 3D in Draw, though the result is not always
ideal. Gimp’s Map Object filter is much slower and a bit less
interactive, but offers much higher-quality mapping on a
variety of shapes. But Draw is really useful to Gimp users
thanks to its predefined shapes. In Draw these shapes are in
vector format, which makes them easy to scale and modify.
For example, Draw provides us with multiple types of callout
shapes – the small bubbles that are associated with
characters speaking in a comic strip. These shapes can be
sized without losing quality in Draw. To get them into Gimp
simply copy them in Draw by clicking Edit > Copy or pressing
Ctrl+C. Then paste them in a Gimp image window. This is a
much easier process than trying to hand-draw the somewhat
odd shapes provided by the callouts.
Draw是一个比Gimp粗糙的绘图工具，但它有一些有趣的功能。任何2D的图形都可以迅速用Draw变为3D，不过有时候效果不理想。Gimp的映射滤镜较慢，互动性也差一点，但是对多种形状都有高质量映射。Draw对Gimp用户来说确实有用，因为它有预定义的形状。在Draw中这些形状是矢量格式的，很方便缩放和修改。比如说，Draw提供了很多插图标注的形状——小泡泡的意思在连环画中，人物所说的话。这些形状在Draw中随便更改尺寸，却不会损失质量。要导入Gimp中时，只需在Draw中复制（编辑>复制）或使用Ctrl+C，然后粘贴进Gimp图像窗口。这比在Gimp里面手工绘制不规则的标注图形方便太多了。

Summary
（小标题）总结
This month’s tutorial could be viewed as a laundry list of
things the Gimp can’t do, but this isn’t about missing features.
Instead it’s about using the right tool for the job. No single
tool does everything and in truth, no one really wants such an
application. Such a program would be unwieldy to use, with
so many buttons, toolbars, and windows. Instead, it’s better
to define a workflow into a series of tasks that can be
accomplished with a variety of tools, then merge it all
together at the end. Use OpenOffice.org and Scribus for
document layout and management and leave the graphic
design to tools like the Gimp and Inkscape. 
本月的指南相当于列一个Gimp做不到的事情的清单，但这不是说缺什么功能。事实上这是讲怎样为工作选择合适的工具。事实上没有一个工具可以完成所有工作，没有人想要这样的一个软件。这种软件肯定不好操作，因为它会有太多按钮、工具栏和窗口。其实，定一个工作流程来完成一系列任务，使用不同的工具，然后把它们合并在一起更好。使用OpenOffice.org和Scribus来做文字排版管理，把图形设计留给像Gimp和Inkscape这样的工具吧。

（Next month We’re turning simple effects into a classy advertising poster.）
（页底4：下个月我们要给一个高级旅馆的海报加一些简单的效果。）



(Gimp’s Text tool provides a button for converting a text
layer to a path that can then be edited using the Path tool.)
（插话：Gimp的文字工具提供一个按钮，可以把文字图层变成路径，以便用路径工具进行编辑。）

(In Inkscape,
the text can
be edited in
place and the
letter positions
can be edited
further either
independently or
as a group.)
（插话：在Inkscape中，文字可以在恰当的位置编辑，字母位置可以单个或成组更改。）

(The
default
Inkscape
toolbar is
a single
vertical row
on the left
of the main
window.
The tools
highlighted
are, from
top to
bottom,
the Select,
Bézier and
Text tools.)
（插话：默认的Inkscape工具条是一个但行垂直条，位于主窗口左侧。此处突出的工具，从上到下，分别是选择、贝塞尔工具以及文字工具。）

(This sort of
positioning of
individual or
subgroups of
letters cannot
be done in
Gimp without
fine-tuned path
editing. After
you’ve kerned
them, the letters
spread across
the length of the
curve.)
（插话：这类单个或成组的文字，在Gimp中如果不做路径调整，是不能做到的。在你调整他们的字距后，文字延伸到整个曲线范围。）

(When opening an SVG, choose to import paths but don’t merge them. This
allows scaling and rendering of the text without rendering the curve itself.)
（插话：在打开SVG格式的文件时，选择导入路径，但不要合并。这样可以缩放或着色文字，而不影响曲线本身。）

(This vector art from OpenClipart.org was imported from
SVG into Gimp. Selections and bi-linear gradients add depth.)
（插话：这个来自OpenClipart.org的矢量图是以SVG格式导入Gimp的。选区和对称线性渐变功能将其立体化。）

（Importing the image
is extremely easy with
a mature page layout
tool such as Scribus.）
（插话：对于成熟的页面排版工具例如Scribus来说，导入图片及其简便。）

（Scribus exports the
entire page as a single
layer using PNG or SVG,
even with multiple layers
in the Scribus document.
PNG may be easier to work
with since it provides a
solid white background.）
（Scribus以一个图层导出整个页面为PNG或SVG文件，就算Scribus文件中有多个图层也一样。PNG更好用，因为它本身是白色背景。）

（Once the duotone effect is applied to the image frame, it
can be edited directly in the Gimp.）
（插话：一旦给画框应用了双色效果，它就可以直接在Gimp中编辑了。）

（3D mapping is fast in Draw but its predefined shapes, like the callout and puzzle piece shown here, are what attract Gimp users to the application.）
（在Draw中，3D映射很快。但吸引Gimp用户使用该软件的是它的预定义形状，比如这里列出的插图标注、拼图碎片形状。）
